Good day to you.
How are you doing?
In this video,
we are going to solve the problem
we have at the moment where the ship
can go flying off the screen.
We're gonna start.
Let's together open up
our player.csscript and
have a look at what we need to do in here.
We've got our movement, that's great.
We need a way to clamp the movement so
the play can only move a certain
amount to the left and a certain
amount to the right and up and down.
Let me show you a slide.
ViewPortToWorldPoint() which is
a method which converts the position of
something as it relates to the camera
view into a world space view.
So if we look at the camera
down at the bottom left of
the ViewPortToWorldPoint()
the bottom left will be (0, 0).
And it's using no matter how long the
camera is all the way to the other side is
1, all the way to the top is 1.
So it becomes a relative conversation,
so bottom left (0, 0),
top right is (1, 1), so x1 and y1.
And from within there we could say, for
example if we had the camera views, so
if the camera thought that something
was 0.8, so 0.8 on the x and
0.4 on the y it would
be a roundabout there.
What would that be in world units?
Where exactly would that be?
The ViewPortToWorldPoint()
allows us to do that.
Let me just anchor this a little bit
further by saying if I was to grab
my player.
You don't need to do this,
I'm just showing you as an example.
If I was to move it to roughly where
we had on our slide there that
was 0.8 on x and 0.4 on the y,
as a relative camera position,
then that would be a 3.26 and
minus 2.6 as our world space units.
Why do we do this?
Why don't we just get there and say well,
let's just say that the player can
only go as high as 4.76 and not 9.35?
Well, if we went and
changed our main camera and said well,
let's zoom it out a little bit further and
put it to 12.
Then the position that the player ship is,
when we're at the points we just
calculated or reset 4.76 and 9.35.
It changes,
based upon the size of the camera, so
that's why we're setting this up so
that we've got this flexibility.
We can change around our camera
without then having to go and
find some values that we've arbitrarily
placed where the ship can or can't go.
We've done similar things
in different sections but
we're doing it this way just to show you
a different way to go about doing this.
Okay, so that's enough talk about the
concept, let's actually go and do that.
First thing in our start method,
we need to set up our boundaries.
And I'm gonna create a method
in here to capture our content.
We'll call this, what should we call it?
Set UpMoveBoundaries.
SetUpMoveBoundaries, so
we're gonna call this right on the start.
We're setting up the boundaries of
where the player can or can't move.
Gonna right-click on that and
find my option to create a or
to generate a method.
That's gonna generate
a method right below,
it's gonna give it private void
which is what we want set up.
Move boundaries, excellent.
Throw new not implemented,
that's just in there as a place holder.
We'll delete that.
Now, what we need to do is to say first
of all what camera are we talking about?
Let's give ourselves a local
variable within our method here,
it will be of type camera.
We'll call this game camera, camera so
that in every scene we have
this method being called in.
It's looking for the gameCamera, and
that game camera is going to be
assigned as the Camera.main.
So we're saying the main camera in
our scene we'll call the mainCamera.
So for now on we can just use
gameCamera as our variable, and
we need to set up a number of things.
First of all, we set up the xMin, so
the minimum that you can go on the x axis.
And then because we haven't declared
it yet, we will jump up to the top
of our script up here and say we need to
create xMin, which will be of type float.
Float x min, and that's all for now.
We'll just initialize xMin.
While we're here we'll initialize x float,
xMax as well.
We need an xMin and an xMax.
Get your capitalization correct there.
Okay, so we're gonna xMin and xMax.
So now in our SetUpMoveBoundaries
when we're looking at xMin,
we're going to use gameCamera,
and within gameCamera we're
gonna call the method of well,
ViewPortToWorldPoint, great.
And it's gonna look forward, let me
just show you the documentation here,
I've given you a link to this as well.
It's looking for a Vector3,
Vector3 and Viewport space.
Because it's a Vector3 we
know we need to have three.
Three numbers in here an X, a Y and a Z.
I'm highlighting that cuz a lot of what
we do in this course are vector 2's,
but this is a vector 3, so we need
to create ourselves a new vector 3.
Within that we will have three values.
What is our x?
What's the minimum x,
as it relates to our camera?
Sorry, over here our camera,
the minimum x is gonna be 0.
The left-hand side of the camera is 0 and
the right-hand side,
in other words the maximum
x is gonna be 1.
So within our minimum x we just
need to know the 0, looking for
a y value and then a zig value.
These won't matter cuz I am not gonna
access them in this particular line, so
I'm gonna say 0, 0.
So I have 0, 0, 0 and
.x because I'm wanting to declare or
give the value to the variable
xMin that comes back from saying,
what is the world's base
value of the x element?
So the x axis for
our ViewPortToWorldPoint(), which we know,
if we move our spaceship around, is going
to be something like minus 5.61 roughly.
That is gonna be the minimum,
the left-hand side.
Okay, cool, now,
we need to create an xMax so
let's start with xMax equals
gameCamera.ViewPortToWorldPoint,
and then the same thing,
new Vector 2, Vector3,
sorry, such a habit of saying that.
Now what is the maximum?
We just said it's 1.
That's the right-hand side
of the viewpoint, 0, 0.
Again for now, the way that I'm getting
this information, I'm saying .x.
The y and the z don't really matter,
we're just interested in that.
And just interested in this
becasue we're saying .x.
Now we'll save this up.
Next thing we need to do is
actually clamp our movement.
I'm actually getting a little bit messied
up with the way that we've organized this,
so I'm gonna do a quick
re-organization under my move method.
Just to move the deltaY, I'll cut that and
put that underneath the deltaX.
This, for me, just helps it be a little
bit more organized so I can say ah-ha,
here we're creating the X delta
horizontal, and the Y delta on vertical.
Great, and now we're defining our new
position on X and new position Y.
So I'm just finding this a little bit
easier to read by organizing it that way.
We don't have to do that if
the other way was fine for you.
But what I do need to say now is, how
are we going to clamp our X position so
the transform.position.x plus deltaX only
goes between the minimum and the maximum?
So there's a little micro-challenge for
you.
If you want to go ahead and do that to
clamp so that our x position can't go
below the min and above the max, Okay,
that was me pausing for you to take on
that mini challenge, the micro challenge.
I will start by saying mathf.clamp,
and we know for
mathf.clamp that the first
part is the value.
So this whole part we got
already is the value, and
the second part is going to be the Min,
and we've defined that as xMin.
And the next part is gonna be the maximum,
so xMax.
Xmas, it's not Christmas, it's xMax.
Okay, having trouble speaking today.
There we go, and semicolon.
And we shouldn't need
to change this at all.
That should be cool.
We'll save, jump back over into Unity,
put our spaceship into the middle, click
on Play, and see how successful we've been
at limiting our left-right movement, okay?
Move to the left, blonk, great.
Move to the right, blonk, great as well.
Okay, cool, very wonderful.
So what I'd like you to
do now as an exercise,
is to set up the vertical limits.
So use the same approach we just did for
the horizontal axis,
limit the player on the vertical axis and
remember,
I've misses a couple of times
change your X's to Y's.
Cuz through and
check that you've done that.
So, set up your limits now so that the
play can only go to the top of the screen
and to the bottom of the screen
when they're flying around.
So do that now,
see you back here in a moment.
Okay, so this should be a nice, reasonably
straightforward cut and paste type job.
I need my xMin and xMax.
First of all, we'll go and
create our yMin and yMax.
yMin?
I don't know,
seemed like a good idea at the time.
Ha ha, dad jokes.
yMin and yMax.
Would have been a much better joke
if I had used Max, wouldn't it?
Cuz Max is an actual person's name.
Why Max?
I don't know.
Okay, so not so
funny the second time around.
Or first time around, Rick.
Thank you for that.
Okay, copy out xMin and
xMax, and Paste that in.
Let's go through, this needs to be yMin,
this needs to be yMax, I don't know,
just because.
And I'll change my dots at the end, .y.
So we're saying we're just interested in
the y value, just give us the y value.
And what do we need to do?
Well, the x's don't matter, so
I'm gonna change them to 0.
The y for the minimum will be 0, and
the y for the maximum will be 1.
Excellent, pretty straightforward there.
Down into our movement, and
as we did with our newXPos or
our newYPos,
we're going to say Mathf.Clamp Now,
brackets tranform.position.y + deltaY.
And then comma, yMin, and
our favorite question, yMax.
Fantastico, Save, back over to Unity.
We'll make sure that works, then I have
one last thing cuz you're probably saying
but it's not quite right, Rick.
Up the top, down the bottom,
looks fantastic,
all the way up to the top, great.
Okay, so we've done our clamping.
What we need to do is say well, we don't
want to play go all the way to the end and
all the way to the side,
it's cuz the player's pivot point
is right in the middle of the ship.
So it's going to the point where it
goes all the way to the pivot point.
We need some padding so
we can't quite go that far.
So here's another good challenge for you,
if you think you know how to put
in some padding, do that now, so
the player doesn't go the whole
way to those end points.
Pause the video and do that now.
Otherwise, we'll do this together.
So what do we need to do?
Well, first of all let's
serialized the paddings so
that we can change this if
we want to tune our game.
We'll make this a float, we'll call
it padding, nearly called it pudding.
Shouldn't call it that, and
we'll make this for now, make it 1f and
see how that feels.
It's not serializable, it's serializefield
field, Rick, serialize field.
There we go.
And then we've got padding,
where do we add padding?
Well we're gonna add padding down
here to our ViewportToWorldPoint().
And if you want you could set up
an .x; padding and a .y; padding.
I might in the future set up a padding so
that my player can go only up
to about here up at the top so
they don't accidentally get smashed
by anything that flies in off-screen.
But for now we'll just leave it
a uniform padding the whole way around.
If you wanna add some
differentiating padding you can.
What we will need to do is say the padding
on our xMin is gonna be + padding.
Now padding on the xMax is
gonna be minus the padding
cuz we want it to be to the left
of the maximum, which is minus.
That's why it's minus and
then same here, plus padding and
plus pudding, padding,
padding, that's what I mean.
Might be time to go eat.
Okay, Save up.
Sorry, I mean minus padding.
Okay, now let's just in,
have a look and see how it works.
Great, okay.
So there's our ship flying around with
some padding on the up, down, left, and
right, and I think we've done enough for
our player movement for now.
It's time to move on to the next content.
So great work in this video and
I'll see you again real soon.